Deep Learning Exercises [DL E]
Exercise 2
Convolutional Neural NetworksDL Tutors Team
June 24, 2022
Convolutional Neural Networks
We will extend our framework to include the building blocks for modern Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs). To this end, we will add initialization schemes improving our results,
advanced optimizers and the two iconic layers making up CNNs, the convolutional layer and
the max-pooling layer. To ensure compatibility between fully connected and convolutional
layers, we will further implement a atten layer. Of course we want to continue implementing
the layers ourselves and the usage of machine learning libraries is still not allowed.
1 Initializers
Initialization is critical for non-convex optimization problems. Depending on the application
and network, dierent initialization strategies are required. A popular initialization scheme is
named Xavier or Glorot initialization. Later an improved scheme specically targeting ReLU
activation functions was proposed by Kaiming He.
Task:
Implement four classes Constant ,UniformRandom ,Xavier andHein the le \Initializ-
ers.py" in folder \Layers". Each of them has to provide the method initialize(weights shape,
fanin, fan out) which returns an initialized tensor of the desired shape.
ˆImplement all four initialization schemes. Note the following:
{TheConstant class has a member that determines the constant value used for
weight initialization. The value can be passed as a constructor argument, with a
default of 0.1.
{The support of the uniform distribution is the interval [0 ;1).
{Have a look at the exercise slides for more information on Xavier and He initializers.
ˆAdd a method initialize(weights initializer, bias initializer) to the class FullyCon-
nected reinitializing its weights. Initialize the bias separately with the bias initializer .
Remember that the bias is usually also stored in the weights matrix.
ˆRefactor the class NeuralNetwork to receive a weights initializer and a
bias initializer upon construction.
ˆExtend the method append layer(layer) in the class NeuralNetwork such that it
initializes trainable layers with the stored initializers .
You can verify your implementation using the provided testsuite by providing the commandline
parameter TestInitializers .
1

Deep Learning Exercises [DL E]
Exercise 2
Convolutional Neural NetworksDL Tutors Team
June 24, 2022
2 Advanced Optimizers
More advanced optimization schemes can increase speed of convergence. We implement a pop-
ular per-parameter adaptive scheme named Adam and a common scheme improving stochastic
gradient descent called momentum.
Task:
Implement the classes SgdWithMomentum andAdam in the le \Optimizers.py" in folder
\Optimization". These classes all have to provide the method
calculate update(weight tensor, gradient tensor) .
ˆTheSgdWithMomentum constructor receives the learning rate and the momen-
tum rate in this order.
ˆTheAdam constructor receives the learning rate,muandrho, exactly in this order.
In literature muis often referred as 1andrhoas2.
ˆImplement for both optimizers the method
calculate update(weight tensor, gradient tensor) as it was done with the basic
SGD Optimizer.
You can verify your implementation using the provided testsuite by providing the commandline
parameter TestOptimizers2 .
2

Deep Learning Exercises [DL E]
Exercise 2
Convolutional Neural NetworksDL Tutors Team
June 24, 2022
3 Flatten Layer
Flatten layers reshapes the multi-dimensional input to a one dimensional feature vector. This
is useful especially when connecting a convolutional or pooling layer with a fully connected
layer.
Task:
Implement a class Flatten in the le \Flatten.py" in folder \Layers". This class has to provide
the methods forward(input tensor) andbackward(error tensor) .
ˆWrite a constructor for this class, receiving no arguments .
ˆImplement a method forward(input tensor) , which reshapes and returns the input tensor .
ˆImplement a method backward(error tensor) which reshapes and returns the er-
rortensor .
You can verify your implementation using the provided testsuite by providing the commandline
parameter TestFlatten .
3

Deep Learning Exercises [DL E]
Exercise 2
Convolutional Neural NetworksDL Tutors Team
June 24, 2022
4 Convolutional Layer
While fully connected layers are theoretically well suited to approximate any function they
struggle to eciently classify images due to extensive memory consumption and overtting.
Using convolutional layers, these problems can be circumvented by restricting the layer's pa-
rameters to local receptive elds.
Task:
Implement a class Conv in the le \Conv.py" in folder \Layers". This class has to provide
the methods forward(input tensor) andbackward(error tensor) .
ˆWrite a constructor for this class, receiving the arguments stride shape ,convolu-
tion shape andnum kernels dening the operation. Note the following:
{this layer has trainable parameters, so set the inherited member trainable accord-
ingly.
{ stride shape can be a single value or a tuple. The latter allows for dierent strides
in the spatial dimensions.
{ convolution shape determines whether this object provides a 1D or a 2D con-
volution layer. For 1D, it has the shape [c, m], whereas for 2D, it has the shape
[c, m, n], where c represents the number of input channels, and m, n represent the
spatial extent of the lter kernel.
{ num kernels is an integer value.
Initialize the parameters of this layer uniformly random in the range [0 ;1).
ˆTo be able to test the gradients with respect to the weights: The members for weights
and biases should be named weights andbias. Additionally provide two properties :
gradient weights andgradient bias, which return the gradient with respect to the
weights and bias, after they have been calculated in the backward-pass.
ˆImplement a method forward(input tensor) which returns a tensor that serves as the
input tensor for the next layer. Note the following:
{The input layout for 1D is dened in b, c, y order, for 2D in b, c, y, x order. Here,
b stands for the batch, c represents the channels and x, y represent the spatial
dimensions.
{You can calculate the output shape in the beginning based on the input tensor
and the stride shape .
{Use zero-padding for convolutions/correlations (\same" padding). This allows input
and output to have the same spatial shape for a stride of 1.
4

Deep Learning Exercises [DL E]
Exercise 2
Convolutional Neural NetworksDL Tutors Team
June 24, 2022
Make sure that 1 1-convolutions and 1D convolutions are handled correctly.
Hint: Using correlation in the forward and convolution/correlation in the backward pass
might help with the ipping of kernels.
Hint 2: The scipy package features a n-dimensional convolution/correlation.
Hint 3: Eciency trade-os will be necessary in this scope. For example, striding may
be implemented wastefully as subsampling after convolution/correlation.
ˆImplement a property optimizer storing the optimizer for this layer. Note that you
need two copies of the optimizer object if you handle the bias separately from the other
weights.
ˆImplement a method backward(error tensor) which updates the parameters using
theoptimizer (if available) and returns the error tensor which returns a tensor that
servers as error tensor for the next layer.
ˆImplement a method initialize(weights initializer, bias initializer) which reinitial-
izes the weights by using the provided initializer objects.
You can verify your implementation using the provided testsuite by providing the command-
line parameter TestConv . For further debugging purposes we provide optional unittests in
\SoftConvTests.py". Please read the instructions there carefully in case you need them.
5

Deep Learning Exercises [DL E]
Exercise 2
Convolutional Neural NetworksDL Tutors Team
June 24, 2022
5 Pooling Layer
Pooling layers are typically used in conjunction with the convolutional layer. They reduce the
dimensionality of the input and therefore also decrease memory consumption. Additionally,
they reduce overtting by introducing a degree of scale and translation invariance. We will
implement max-pooling as the most common form of pooling.
Task:
Implement a class Pooling in the le \Pooling.py" in folder \Layers". This class has to provide
the methods forward(input tensor) andbackward(error tensor) .
ˆWrite a constructor receiving the arguments stride shape andpooling shape , with
the same ordering as specied in the convolutional layer.
ˆImplement a method forward(input tensor) which returns a tensor that serves as the
input tensor for the next layer. Hint: Keep in mind to store the correct information
necessary for the backward pass.
{Dierent to the convolutional layer, the pooling layer must be implemented only for
the 2D case.
{Use \valid"-padding for the pooling layer. This means, unlike to the convolutional
layer, don't apply any \zero"-padding. This may discard border elements of the
input tensor. Take it into account when creating your output tensor.
ˆImplement a method backward(error tensor) which returns a tensor that serves as
theerror tensor for the next layer.
You can verify your implementation using the provided testsuite by providing the commandline
parameter TestPooling .
6

Deep Learning Exercises [DL E]
Exercise 2
Convolutional Neural NetworksDL Tutors Team
June 24, 2022
6 Test, Debug and Finish
Now we implemented everything.
Task:
Debug your implementation until every test in the suite passes. You can run all tests by
providing no commandline parameter. To run the unittests you can either execute them with
python in the terminal or with the dedicated unittest environment of PyCharm. We recommend
the latter one, as it provides a better overview of all tests. For the automated computation of
the bonus points achieved in one exercise, run the unittests with the bonus ag in a terminal,
with
python3 NeuralNetworkTests.py Bonus
or set in PyCharm a new \Python" conguration with Bonus as \Parameters". Notice, in
some cases you need to set your src folder as \Working Directory". More information about
PyCharm congurations can be found here1.
Make sure you don't forget to upload your submission to StudOn. Use the dispatch tool, which
checks all les for completeness and zips the les you need for the upload. Try
python3 dispatch.py --help
to check out the manual. For dispatching your folder run e.g.
python3 dispatch.py -i ./src_to_implement -o submission.zip
and upload the .zip le to StudOn.
1https://www.jetbrains.com/help/pycharm/creating-and-editing-run-debug-congurations.html
7